README.md, before:

# Quarto Examples with Docker

This repository contains supporting material ofr the following blog posts on the _Hosting Data Apps_ ([hosting.analythium.io](https://hosting.analythium.io/)) website:

- [How to Set Up Quarto with Docker, Part 1: Static Content]()
- [How to Set Up Quarto with Docker, Part 2: Dynamic Content]()

[Quarto](https://quarto.org/) is is an open-source scientific and technical publishing system built on [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/).

The examples in this repository focus on R related Quarto documents. We review the different options for dockerizing static and interactive Quarto documents.

- [Quarto Examples with Docker](#quarto-examples-with-docker)
  - [Create a Quarto parent image](#create-a-quarto-parent-image)
  - [Render a static file](#render-a-static-file)
  - [Render a static project](#render-a-static-project)
    - [Website](#website)
      - [Option 1: local rendering](#option-1-local-rendering)
      - [Option 2: render inside Docker](#option-2-render-inside-docker)
    - [Book](#book)
      - [Option 1: local rendering](#option-1-local-rendering-1)
      - [Option 2: render inside Docker](#option-2-render-inside-docker-1)
  - [Render an interactive file with widgets](#render-an-interactive-file-with-widgets)
  - [Server: Shiny](#server-shiny)
  - [Shiny prerendered](#shiny-prerendered)

## Create a Quarto parent image

We build a parent image with Quarto installed so that we can use this image in subsequent `FROM` instructions.

The `Dockerfile.base` is based on a Ubuntu based image.

This part in the Dockerfile will [install](https://docs.rstudio.com/resources/install-quarto/#quarto-deb-file-install) the Quarto command line tool:

```dockerfile
...
RUN curl -LO https://quarto.org/download/latest/quarto-linux-amd64.deb
RUN gdebi --non-interactive quarto-linux-amd64.deb
...
```

If you want a specific version, use:

```dockerfile
...
ARG QUARTO_VERSION="0.9.522"
RUN curl -o quarto-linux-amd64.deb -L https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/releases/download/v${QUARTO_VERSION}/quarto-${QUARTO_VERSION}-linux-amd64.deb
RUN gdebi --non-interactive quarto-linux-amd64.deb
...
```

Now we can build the image:

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.base \
    -t analythium/r2u-quarto:20.04 .
```

Run the container interactively to check the installation:

```bash
docker run -it --rm analythium/r2u-quarto:20.04 bash
```

Type `quarto check`, you should see check marks:

```bash
root@d8377016be7f:/# quarto check

[✓] Checking Quarto installation......OK
      Version: 1.0.36
      Path: /opt/quarto/bin

[✓] Checking basic markdown render....OK

[✓] Checking Python 3 installation....OK
      Version: 3.8.10
      Path: /usr/bin/python3
      Jupyter: (None)

      Jupyter is not available in this Python installation.
      Install with python3 -m pip install jupyter

[✓] Checking R installation...........OK
      Version: 4.2.1
      Path: /usr/lib/R
      LibPaths:
        - /usr/local/lib/R/site-library
        - /usr/lib/R/site-library
        - /usr/lib/R/library
      rmarkdown: 2.14

[✓] Checking Knitr engine render......OK
```

Type `exit` to quit the session.

## Render a static file

Render the R example for [air quality](https://quarto.org/docs/computations/r.html):

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-file \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-file .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-file
```

## Render a static project

Projects contain multiple files, like [website](https://quarto.org/docs/reference/projects/websites.html) and [books](https://quarto.org/docs/reference/projects/books.html).

### Website

Use the following command to create a website template locally: `quarto create-project static-website --type website`.

#### Option 1: local rendering

Render the project as `quarto render static-website --output-dir output`.

Then use this Dockerfile:

```bash
FROM ghcr.io/openfaas/of-watchdog:0.9.6 AS watchdog
FROM alpine:latest
RUN mkdir /app
COPY static-website/output /app
COPY --from=watchdog /fwatchdog .
ENV mode="static"
ENV static_path="/app"
HEALTHCHECK --interval=3s CMD [ -e /tmp/.lock ] || exit 1
CMD ["./fwatchdog"]
```

#### Option 2: render inside Docker

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-website \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-website .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-website
```

### Book

Use the following command to create a book template locally: `quarto create-project static-book --type book`.

#### Option 1: local rendering

Render the project as `quarto render static-book --output-dir output`.

Then use this Dockerfile:

```bash
FROM ghcr.io/openfaas/of-watchdog:0.9.6 AS watchdog
FROM alpine:latest
RUN mkdir /app
COPY static-book/output /app
COPY --from=watchdog /fwatchdog .
ENV mode="static"
ENV static_path="/app"
HEALTHCHECK --interval=3s CMD [ -e /tmp/.lock ] || exit 1
CMD ["./fwatchdog"]
```

#### Option 2: render inside Docker

Note: we need a LaTeX installation, so we add `quarto install tool tinytex` to the Dockerfile:

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-book \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-book .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-book
```

## Render an interactive file with widgets

Render an [interactive](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/widgets/htmlwidgets.html) but static file:

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-widget \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-widget .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-widget
```

## Server: Shiny

You can specify [Shiny](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/shiny/) as the engine to run the dynamic Quarto document.

In this example we do not render the Quarto document up front. The render step will happen when the container is spin up. This is analogous to the R Markdown Shiny runtime.

We use the `quarto serve index.qmd --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0` command to specify port and host IPv4 address. The `quarto serve` function will render the document  before serving.

This example shows the classic Old Faithful histogram with the slider.

```bash
docker build -f Dockerfile.shiny -t analythium/quarto:shiny .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:shiny
```

If you can't kill the container with `Ctrl+C`, try getting the container ID with `docker ps` and then use `docker kill $ID`.

Note: you can serve the doc from R with `quarto::quarto_serve("index.qmd")`.

## Shiny prerendered

Depending on the complexity of your document, rendering at the container launch time will significantly increase "cold start" time. But we can render the document as part of the Docker build process. This is analogous to the R Markdown prerendered Shiny runtime (shinyrmd).

When we render the file, the UI elements get rendered, while the code chinks marked as `context: server` will wait until the rendered document is served.

This example shows k-means clustering with [custom page layout](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/layout.html).

`quarto serve` is called with the `--no-render` flag to avoid unnecessary rendering.

```bash
docker build \
  -f Dockerfile.shiny-prerendered \
  -t analythium/quarto:shiny-prerendered .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:shiny-prerendered
```

Commit message:

Link for contexts
Signed-off-by: Peter Solymos <psolymos@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# Quarto Examples with Docker

This repository contains supporting material ofr the following blog posts on the _Hosting Data Apps_ ([hosting.analythium.io](https://hosting.analythium.io/)) website:

- [How to Set Up Quarto with Docker, Part 1: Static Content]()
- [How to Set Up Quarto with Docker, Part 2: Dynamic Content]()

[Quarto](https://quarto.org/) is is an open-source scientific and technical publishing system built on [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/).

The examples in this repository focus on R related Quarto documents. We review the different options for dockerizing static and interactive Quarto documents.

- [Quarto Examples with Docker](#quarto-examples-with-docker)
  - [Create a Quarto parent image](#create-a-quarto-parent-image)
  - [Render a static file](#render-a-static-file)
  - [Render a static project](#render-a-static-project)
    - [Website](#website)
      - [Option 1: local rendering](#option-1-local-rendering)
      - [Option 2: render inside Docker](#option-2-render-inside-docker)
    - [Book](#book)
      - [Option 1: local rendering](#option-1-local-rendering-1)
      - [Option 2: render inside Docker](#option-2-render-inside-docker-1)
  - [Render an interactive file with widgets](#render-an-interactive-file-with-widgets)
  - [Server: Shiny](#server-shiny)
  - [Shiny prerendered](#shiny-prerendered)

## Create a Quarto parent image

We build a parent image with Quarto installed so that we can use this image in subsequent `FROM` instructions.

The `Dockerfile.base` is based on a Ubuntu based image.

This part in the Dockerfile will [install](https://docs.rstudio.com/resources/install-quarto/#quarto-deb-file-install) the Quarto command line tool:

```dockerfile
...
RUN curl -LO https://quarto.org/download/latest/quarto-linux-amd64.deb
RUN gdebi --non-interactive quarto-linux-amd64.deb
...
```

If you want a specific version, use:

```dockerfile
...
ARG QUARTO_VERSION="0.9.522"
RUN curl -o quarto-linux-amd64.deb -L https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/releases/download/v${QUARTO_VERSION}/quarto-${QUARTO_VERSION}-linux-amd64.deb
RUN gdebi --non-interactive quarto-linux-amd64.deb
...
```

Now we can build the image:

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.base \
    -t analythium/r2u-quarto:20.04 .
```

Run the container interactively to check the installation:

```bash
docker run -it --rm analythium/r2u-quarto:20.04 bash
```

Type `quarto check`, you should see check marks:

```bash
root@d8377016be7f:/# quarto check

[✓] Checking Quarto installation......OK
      Version: 1.0.36
      Path: /opt/quarto/bin

[✓] Checking basic markdown render....OK

[✓] Checking Python 3 installation....OK
      Version: 3.8.10
      Path: /usr/bin/python3
      Jupyter: (None)

      Jupyter is not available in this Python installation.
      Install with python3 -m pip install jupyter

[✓] Checking R installation...........OK
      Version: 4.2.1
      Path: /usr/lib/R
      LibPaths:
        - /usr/local/lib/R/site-library
        - /usr/lib/R/site-library
        - /usr/lib/R/library
      rmarkdown: 2.14

[✓] Checking Knitr engine render......OK
```

Type `exit` to quit the session.

## Render a static file

Render the R example for [air quality](https://quarto.org/docs/computations/r.html):

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-file \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-file .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-file
```

## Render a static project

Projects contain multiple files, like [website](https://quarto.org/docs/reference/projects/websites.html) and [books](https://quarto.org/docs/reference/projects/books.html).

### Website

Use the following command to create a website template locally: `quarto create-project static-website --type website`.

#### Option 1: local rendering

Render the project as `quarto render static-website --output-dir output`.

Then use this Dockerfile:

```bash
FROM ghcr.io/openfaas/of-watchdog:0.9.6 AS watchdog
FROM alpine:latest
RUN mkdir /app
COPY static-website/output /app
COPY --from=watchdog /fwatchdog .
ENV mode="static"
ENV static_path="/app"
HEALTHCHECK --interval=3s CMD [ -e /tmp/.lock ] || exit 1
CMD ["./fwatchdog"]
```

#### Option 2: render inside Docker

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-website \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-website .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-website
```

### Book

Use the following command to create a book template locally: `quarto create-project static-book --type book`.

#### Option 1: local rendering

Render the project as `quarto render static-book --output-dir output`.

Then use this Dockerfile:

```bash
FROM ghcr.io/openfaas/of-watchdog:0.9.6 AS watchdog
FROM alpine:latest
RUN mkdir /app
COPY static-book/output /app
COPY --from=watchdog /fwatchdog .
ENV mode="static"
ENV static_path="/app"
HEALTHCHECK --interval=3s CMD [ -e /tmp/.lock ] || exit 1
CMD ["./fwatchdog"]
```

#### Option 2: render inside Docker

Note: we need a LaTeX installation, so we add `quarto install tool tinytex` to the Dockerfile:

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-book \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-book .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-book
```

## Render an interactive file with widgets

Render an [interactive](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/widgets/htmlwidgets.html) but static file:

```bash
docker build \
    -f Dockerfile.static-widget \
    -t analythium/quarto:static-widget .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:static-widget
```

## Server: Shiny

You can specify [Shiny](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/shiny/) as the engine to run the dynamic Quarto document.

In this example we do not render the Quarto document up front. The render step will happen when the container is spin up. This is analogous to the R Markdown Shiny runtime.

We use the `quarto serve index.qmd --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0` command to specify port and host IPv4 address. The `quarto serve` function will render the document  before serving.

This example shows the classic Old Faithful histogram with the slider.

```bash
docker build -f Dockerfile.shiny -t analythium/quarto:shiny .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:shiny
```

If you can't kill the container with `Ctrl+C`, try getting the container ID with `docker ps` and then use `docker kill $ID`.

Note: you can serve the doc from R with `quarto::quarto_serve("index.qmd")`.

## Shiny prerendered

Depending on the complexity of your document, rendering at the container launch time will significantly increase "cold start" time. But we can render the document as part of the Docker build process. This is analogous to the R Markdown prerendered Shiny runtime (shinyrmd).

When we render the file, the UI elements get rendered, while the code chinks marked as `context: server` will wait until the rendered document is served. Read more about [render and server contexts](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/shiny/execution.html#sharing-code).

This example shows k-means clustering with [custom page layout](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/layout.html).

`quarto serve` is called with the `--no-render` flag to avoid unnecessary rendering.

```bash
docker build \
  -f Dockerfile.shiny-prerendered \
  -t analythium/quarto:shiny-prerendered .

docker run -p 8080:8080 analythium/quarto:shiny-prerendered
```
